---
title: 'Being Asian'
date: 2025-12-23
tags:
  - en
  - top
---

Growing up Asian comes with its own set of challenges and experiences:

# Being Asian in Germany

To be clear, it was not bad. People were just very ignorant about Asia at the time. Peole did not know any Asian countries aside from China (and later Japan and Korea). Naturally, people always asked me where I'm from and followed up by asking me where Vietnam is. Ideally, being constantly confronted with those questions should have made me an expert at navigating these topics, but it didn't. I would reply saying Vietnam was a tiny country in Asia, even though I'm now aware that it's not small at all by European standards -- it's actually just long and a little bit smaller than Germany and bigger than Italy. I once said it was almost the smallest country in the world, to which a girl replied, _like the Vatican?_ Oops.

As I said, ignorance was the biggest thing. People were actually just very curious about Vietnam because they didn't know anything about it. I wish I had known better ways to respond and make people more fascinated about Southeast Asia -- but nobody teaches you that stuff. Now that I'm wiser, I can talk about some Vietnamese food and customs and stuff like that, and I'm looking forward to sharing that knowledge with others again. But make no mistake: no kid should have the responsibility of being the ambassador of their ethnicity. It wasn't my job to tell people that Asia is huge, and that China itself has so many different ethnicities and languages, and that it's extremely uncommon in China to eat dogs or cats.

Did people make fun of me? I don't think so. I was very polite and quiet. Did people say _ching chong_ to me? ...Probably? But I don't remember any of that. I also don't remember anyone doing the slit-eyes gesture. I was just known as the smart Asian. But imagine if I wasn't academically gifted: I probably would've felt shame for not living up to those public stereotypes/expectations in addition to the shame that my parents would've brought upon me in private.

People always asked me if I was either Chinese or Japanese (or Korean), as if they were the only countries in Asia. I don't blame them, especially since we were pretty young children at the time. However, one time, after a tennis game (Verbandsspiele), our team had dinner with the opponents as usual. It was either lasagna or Schnitzel. Everyone was chill and we had a good time. At the end, one of the opponent said, _We should all probably start heading home. Especially **you** -- you probably have a long flight back to Japan!_ I won't lie, that was a creative one, and he was cracking a pre-teen joke. But things like that, while small and not ill-intentioned in the moment, perpetuate what is called the **perpetual foreigner** myth/effect. You are always singled out as the foreigner, the different one. You are known for not being "German" or "European". You are constantly being reminded that you're not "from here", even though you were born here. And so it's hard for some people to feel like they belong. It's significant because in reality, probably half of my elementary school class consisted of foreigners as well in that their parents came from other, usually European countries. But none of them stood out like me (and black and brown kids, which we didn't have a lot of).

Overall, I didn't experience any overt racism. People were ignorant, but generally super curious. The big thing is the perpetual foreigner effect: you're always the odd one out. Did I experience microaggressions? I don't know, I was too young to understand those. I don't think people commented on my German, actually. Here's another thing about growing up being the only one having those experiences: you don't know how to actually deal with them, you don't know anyone else who goes through it, and so you never realize if you're handling things correctly.

# Being Asian in California

Since I left before my teenage years, the perpetual foreigner effect didn't strongly affect my sense of belonging. Most people at EVHS were Asian, especially Vietnamese, so I didn't stick out. That being said, I think I still stuck out as I did (and presently do) have an interesting accent. But for the most part, it was nice blending in with everyone else. It's refreshing to just be seen like everyone else. I don't have to be the ambassador for anyone. I'm not expected to teach anyone about my culture and language. At least, that's how it was at first sight...

When I told people I was from Germany, most people just accepted it. It's normal for Americans to have different ethnicities, so it wasn't anything weird. However, Americans were actually quite ignorant about Germany too... In middle school, some of the kids sitting next to me would get quiet when the topic of WWII and the Nazis and Holocaust came up... they thought I must be a Nazi or something, and that German schools don't teach anything about WWII. It was quite weird to have to tell people that we do learn quite a lot about it, and from a pretty neutral perspective, too. So yeah, ignorance exists in every country.

So did I feel comfortable telling people I was from Germany in high school? For the most part, yes, I felt pretty secure about it. There was one instance, however, that definitely angered me. In Mr. Hanson's (a white guy) PE class, we had a day where we just used the spin room while he played some music on the speakers. He asked for volunteers to queue some music from their culture/origin, and so when I raised my hand and he came over, I told him I wanted to add a German song (I was going to play some Ufo361). He looked quite skeptical -- I'm not sure what he said, but he kind of asked me if I'm really German or if it's really my culture -- something along those lines. I didn't really know what to reply, so yeah, he basically skipped me. Later that day, I was pretty pissed. I'm pretty sure he wouldn't have done that if I was white. Why do I have to prove that I'm German? And how did he want me to prove it? Maybe he was suspicious I was gonna play some Nazi song? I don't think so. He probably thought he was more German than me just because he was once stationed in Germany for the US military. Newsflash: those military bases are bubbles. Most people just stay on campus behind their barbed wire fence. 

I guess one of the big upsides to spending my teenage years in California is that I feel quite confident in my Asian identity. At USF, after joining VSA, I was able to feel pride in my heritage. I liked learning the fan dance and wearing an ao dai. Learning Vietnamese helped me appreciate how expressive the language is. My roots are Vietnamese, and I'm proud of it. And I'm also proud of being German.

---

I guess the downside to growing up "different" is just that no one really prepares you for it. You're just a kid. You encounter some weird situations. Some situations you encounter regularly, so you get desensitized and come up with a default response or reaction to it. However, just because you have a default response doesn't mean it's necessarily a good response. That's the reason why some Asians (especially comedians) grow up trying to please white people. They joke about eating dogs (or say they don't because they're one of the good ones!) because that's how they learned to deal with those weird questions. My default response about my heritage was saying that Vietnam is a tiny country in Asia -- I didn't how big it was, and no one taught me what to say.

But other situations you only encounter every few years, so beat yourself up for not having the right answer in your head when it happens. I was pretty disappointed in myself that I didn't have the strength to assert myself when Mr. Hanson questioned my identity. I haven't encountered any situations like that since then, and I don't know if I'll have the right answer in my head when it happens again.

> And this is why it's important to talk about these issues. Kids should grow up being aware of the fact that Asia is extremely diverse and doesn't just consist of China, Japan, and Korea. And that ethnic background and nationality are not always the same. Or that you can have multiple identities. My wish is that the next generation of children doesn't have to go through all this alone. You're not alone in feeling that you don't belong, and you're not alone in feeling conflicted about your identity. You don't owe it to anyone to educate them or be a spokesperon for your heritage. And you sure as hell don't have to let people decide your identity or immigration status for you based on your appearance. And if you need help, there are people who will support you.
